David, welcome back to Talk Python To Me. Great to have you here.
Yeah, hello.
Hello, hello.
Going to be super fun to talk about Flask and more broadly, palettes, just all the different
projects around Flask and tools and variations like Quart and so on.
And you give a really nice talk at Embedded FlaskCon.
talk a bit about that in a second, about the state of palettes.
And I thought, you know, let's just take that idea and share it with everyone.
So looking forward to talking about that.
Yeah, there's been a lot going on.
I bet there has.
So, yeah, it's been, I can't remember exactly when you were on,
I think it's about 100 episodes ago, which puts out like a couple of years.
What have you been up to the last couple of years?
Just more flask.
It's all flask all the time.
It seems like such a simple API, but you can work on it forever, right?
Yeah, I've acquired a few more libraries,
so I've written more libraries and stuff as well, but still same job.
Well, I guess I got a house, I got married.
Okay, congratulations, two times.
Yeah.
That's awesome.
So a little bit of life changes.
Yeah, a little bit.
Life keeps marching on, it's amazing.
Cool, well, Flask,
is certainly one of the most popular web frameworks.
It's, I guess we could start with like giving people a sense of the popularity, but my thought
is just like, wow, the pressure of working on something that affects so many folks.
Like if you push out a change, you know?
Yeah.
I've had a weird thought before that like, I try not to think about the numbers too often
because it's like 100 million or more
if you add up all the different libraries and stuff a month.
And I've had a thought before,
like if I push out something that doesn't work for enough people,
like that probably has some like very minor
but noticeable like effect on the tech like sector
for that day or hour, which is scary.
Yeah, it's not quite an AWS US 1 East.
downtime but it's also not not that you know yeah i think a lot i think over the path uh definitely
since i've started a lot more people have become aware of like better practices around like pinning
their dependencies sort of thing um in part because uh we did make some you know deprecations
and then breaking changes in flask and the other libraries and um people came to our issue tracker
saying, oh, you broke something.
And ultimately, I had to tell him, you need to be using a tool.
There's quite a few tools out now, although we don't have a lock file standard yet, but
there's pip compile, there's PDM, there's Rai.
You need to use a tool and pin your dependency tree, because then you can see when there's
updates, and you can update them deliberately and test and adapt to those changes.
And I was giving that message a lot in the beginning.
And over the past five years or so,
I've definitely had to post it less often.
I feel like more people are aware of those tools and practices now.
Well, I would also add that the tooling has gotten a lot better at that.
It used to be, okay, so what you're going to do
is you're going to write a requirements.txt file
and then you set your versions explicitly.
And that, for many people, only addressed the primary dependencies, not the transitive
dependency, you know, right?
They might pin Flask, but did they depend Vexo?
I don't know.
They may have.
Probably they didn't, you know, unless they use pip freeze.
But then you gather a bunch of, like, garbage that isn't actually about your project that
got sucked in from some other thing that got, you know, it's like, it was really sort of
funky before.
And I think, I don't know, you mentioned pip-tools and pip compile.
I am loving that workflow these days.
Yeah, that's what I've switched all the projects themselves to.
So if you go look at Flask or Xoic or any of those,
we have a requirements folder with different environment files
that say, here are our direct dependencies,
and then we compile those into fully locked dependencies,
and all our tests run off of those.
Our build and publish workflow runs off of those.
So it's not quite the same,
because those are our development dependencies
instead of our runtime dependencies.
But it's still really helpful just to know that if we don't
do anything, our process will continue to work
because it worked last time.
And if we have contributors at sprints, now it's much easier.
I had a problem the first few sprints I was running
where every developer would try to set up their own machine
and get different versions of things
or have different bridges.
- Point in time snapshots of just
whenever they got started, right?
- Yeah, so now they all install
the exact same list of dependencies
so everybody's development environment
looks exactly the same, which is a lot more usable.
- Yeah, that's excellent.
I have the same workflow,
I have a top level dependencies
that I actually would consider my dependencies
and then I pip compile, and then unpinned
and I pip compile those to a pin dependencies
and I just do the upgrade when I feel like,
oh, let's go get some new dependencies
and see how that goes.
Yeah, very nice.
Okay, well, let's start with FlaskCon.
I called it an embedded conference.
And this is different than it has been before.
I think FlaskCon at one point was a purely online one,
or maybe that was just COVID,
which is a matter of time, you remember?
It was timing, really, years ago.
right as right before COVID started or quarantine started I had been like
like working myself up to do an in-person conference it's something I've wanted to do for
a while because I love attending conferences I love the community around it DjangoCon happened
in San Diego a few times and that was really fun because I just crashed it as the last person
person um and uh so i was like getting ready to do that and then uh covet happened but some other
members of the community uh the pallets team and community stepped up and said hey we can do
like an online one um running a conference even online is very hard there's a lot of stuff to keep
track of. We ran three online conferences. I think 2020, 2021, and 2023. I think we skipped
one too. But those are all on like pyvideo.org if you want to find them. And now FlaskCon
2024 is there also. And so I finally got the opportunity with PyCon. They previously had
this hatchery program where you could kind of propose, I want to do this event. And the hatchery
program will say, like, that sounds great. We'll give you, you know, we will handle the venue,
the food, the insurance, the legal stuff. You get one of our rooms and you can do whatever you want
in it or whatever you propose in it. And so last year at PyCon, I talked to some of the organizers
and they suggested hey the hatchery is coming back this would be a great way to do it so that you
don't have to learn everything at once right you can practice um yeah so uh we managed to do some
advertising it's hard to advertise new conferences in general and then especially now that um like
most of the python a lot of the python community is not on twitter anymore i'm not um and even if
And if they were, everything is kind of fragmented more.
So it was hard to get the reach and get enough CFP proposals.
But we did get a few and ended up accepting two people
from the community that gave just wonderful talks.
And--
I saw one on doing PWAs.
What was the other one on the talks?
Was it Progressive Podobos?
No, there was one on--
Single page, sorry.
And there was one on observability.
And then, yeah, PWAs or single page apps and the extension ecosystem
and kind of like the idea around defining Flask plugins.
And then there's my talk, which was just the subject of this podcast.
Welcome, people.
What have we been up to?
Yeah, that's cool.
So will it maybe be a PyCon next year?
Or are you going to branch out?
i don't know yet i think they would accept me back but i wouldn't want to like
i always i kind of view the hatchery i mean i don't know if this is true but i kind of view
the hatchery is like uh we're gonna help you get started but not like keep coming back for the same
thing so i don't want to like right right right i'm a 10-year rookie you know you're not a rookie
get out here with the or let me get i would still love to run um a conference somewhat selfishly so
I can run one like in San Diego or on the West Coast at least. That's what I was going to say.
How about San Diego? Then we can come down there and stay by the beach.
Yeah. I mentioned DjangoCon before, but they stayed in San Diego for three years straight
at this little hotel that was really nice. Had a pool. People just kind of congregated and
it was like 15 minute drive for me. And so yeah, next year at PyCon, I might not be there.
we're expecting our daughter to be born in january next year congratulations and and that might take
precedence over pycon i'm gonna have a lot less time in general which will be which will come up
in other things we're going to talk about but yeah i probably like for the first time since 2016 or
2015 i will not go to python probably um yeah and but there was a uh conference right this was the
last conference I went to before quarantine. Two weeks before quarantine hit, I went up to Los
Angeles for PyBeach, which was this very, very small first-time conference. I just love those
little ones. And I met the organizer, Nick Cantar, at North Bay Python a few times now, and I've told
him, look, we should try to bring that back. I think there's a few other people who are interested
as well and i'm like it doesn't have to be flask con specifically but if i could like run some sort
of local conference and i can do some flat stuff or attract some class stuff you know well i'm
pretty excited that uh python is going to be in long beach uh year after next yeah two years from
now that'll be really nice as well so that'll be really nice but maybe you can drum up a bunch of
interests and connect with a lot of people who are conference goers of that place but like encourage
to sign up for a list and like get notified about whatever this other thing is because it'll be in
the same basic neighborhood yeah so uh jazzy out in the audience asks can we attend flaskon online
um this year or this in-person one in 2024 we weren't able to do that but all the talks are
available now on our youtube channel if you just search flask on 2024 you'll find it um or pie
has all of them listed.
The first three we ran were purely online,
so you could watch them streaming.
This year, we just didn't have the infrastructure for it,
so we couldn't really manage to do a live stream
and the recordings at the same time.
I was lucky enough to get Elaine Wong's help
doing the recordings,
and she brought all her cool specialized equipment.
So we were able to get the recordings up really fast, at least.
Yeah, that's really good.
Are the ones for PyCon even up yet?
I don't think they are.
Not that I'm aware of.
Maybe they're going like really slowly,
but yeah, it was really nice.
Like we just recorded this hard drive
and like she was like,
oh, you guys timed that,
like timed all your starts and stops really well.
So all I have to do is like do these like simple cuts.
Right, just trim the edges and upload.
Perfect.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, that's really cool.
So yeah, I'll link to the playlist of FlaskCon 2024
for folks in the show notes.
They can check that out.
Awesome.
Well, we'll see what 2025 brings.
hopefully some more good conference.
So let's--
- Yeah, we might have other like,
we might have other like members besides me
attending PyCon as well.
So we'll see what happens.
- Sure, get someone else to carry the torch.
- Space or something.
So there's always something going on.
- Yeah, for sure.
Now, I wanna talk about the state of palettes in 2024,
but surely there are, you know,
quite a few people out there who listen,
or really new to Python and programming, you'd be surprised.
A lot of people say they use it like this podcast, like language immersion.
Like you want to learn Portuguese.
You moved to Brazil.
You want to learn Python.
You just put on your earbuds and listen until it makes sense.
So especially for those folks, like what is Pallets?
Pallets is an open source organization.
So we're not a company, but we do have like a team of volunteer open source maintainers.
who volunteer their free time to work on flask and the libraries that make up flask that was kind of
its purpose when it was created was hey flask has these set of libraries um arvin the original author
of them was uh not as involved in them anymore and like the community he wanted the community to be
more involved in them so he created this organization this was right around when i was becoming maintainer
or two eight years ago.
And so it's kind of the organization
that holds those projects and the team that kind of maintains
and sets policies and that sort of thing.
So Flask is the most popular library
that everybody heard of, followed by Jinja and Click.
But then we also have Verksoeg, which is the lower level stuff
below Flask.
And then Markup Safe and It's Dangerous
or two little helper libraries for those things.
And then now we've also got Cort,
which is the async version of Flask.
And that's an official palettes project now,
even though it started as just kind of a separate thing.
Yeah, that was an outside thing that Philip Jones worked on.
And now it's coming closer and closer to being official.
Yeah.
And we're doing a lot of work on that
to try to unify Flask and Quart as much as possible.
So behind the scenes, they're sharing a lot more code now.
Quart-- like VaricsOg is all the low-level request response
handling for the Flask uses.
And Quart wasn't using that at first
because it needed much more async things.
But we've managed to develop a lot more things called--
The term is called sans IO, like without input output, where we have all the behavior that's common to both.
It doesn't require asyncio versus sync processes shared between CORT and Flask.
And eventually, we're slowly moving in that direction.
The idea is that at some point you will not pip install CORT or import CORT anymore.
You'll just pip install Flask and then do from Flask import CORT.
instead.
Oh, interesting.
Library as well, once we get to a point that we're really comfortable with.
I see you're shipping one thing.
Will you be able to use the same app?
You always say add app get, or will that be a...
Yeah, that's the one thing.
App F equals Plask and App Q equals Court.
Yeah, you'll still have one single app, but you're going to have to pick ahead of time.
We've tried to think of ways around this, but just the way that Flask is constructed
means that so much of it is customizable by extensions.
And those hook APIs that extensions can customize, all the extensions out there expect that they're
sync, they're def whatever, not async def.
maybe we'll figure out something,
but so far we can't figure out a way to unify that into a single object.
So you're going to have to still pick.
I want to be async first or sync first.
And yeah.
Yeah.
But at least it'll be in one place.
Like you're not going to have to decide,
oh,
I need to know about court.
You can just look at the flash docs and see like,
oh,
I'm going to be doing mostly like,
like web requests or like video processing or something.
that's like the io intensive i should pick court or uh or i'm just doing like the basic api that
everybody makes for their you know data science project i just need flask
okay yeah yeah yeah really interesting question out in the audience will it it sounds like it'll
work both WWSGI and ASGI ASGI?
Any future where it just goes all async?
Not likely in the short term, it sounds like, right?
Yeah, Flask will always be WSGI because it's so tied
to how sync processes work.
ASGI has an ability to-- and so if you use HyperCorn,
which is a popular ASGI server, which is also by Phil from Quart,
you can run a WSGI application as an ASGI application.
You don't necessarily get all the benefits of ASGI,
but you can at least run it with that.
And kind of like in a similar vein, like if you're using Quart,
you can write both sync and async things, and they all just work together.
And with Flask, you can write async stuff in Flask right now.
You just don't get the benefits of ASGI's connection pooling.
So you're still doing one worker per request response,
but you can in that worker kick off async code.
Right, okay.
More easily.
Interesting.
Yeah, I've done stuff for a FastAPI.
I've written a decorator that it decorates both sync and async methods,
And it's pretty tricky.
There's just basically--
Yeah, it has two--
Yeah, two wrappers.
It goes, all right, well, which are you?
We're going to actually apply that one to.
It's tricky to juggle.
And then all the plugins, it's got to be a gnarly combination.
Yeah, basically, we're just taking it in baby steps.
And we're hoping as we keep unifying their shared code more
and more, we can start discovering good patterns
for writing an extension that works in both, for example,
documenting those and maybe helping some extensions that are popular update to that.
Yeah.
So it's a slow process, but it's surmountable.
Yeah, maybe you get to a point where they're close enough.
You're like, oh, now it's really obvious how these things unify.
At the beginning, it wasn't right.
Okay.
So what's the state?
How are things?
What's the state?
maybe start with the big the big boy flask
and inbox zero is like one of the biggest takeaways
it was actually that wasn't 2024 that was
2021 or 22 I think but
look at that yeah we don't have like true zero
most of the time although I do get down to it every now and then but
I did hit inbox zero so when I first started maintaining
all these libraries, I think combined, there was probably over a thousand open issues and PRs.
And that's a nightmare if you know all the code, like if you were the author, but I was not the
author of this code. So I was both unfamiliar with the internals of all these libraries
and had to keep track of all these issues. So I was learning libraries,
learning how to be a maintainer and trying to keep track of like all these
requests going back and forth and like competing PRs and all that sort of stuff.
So it was, early on, it was a goal I identified of like,
I just need to make this manageable. And once I got there,
it's become a lot easier. Like once you're at inbox zero,
it's a lot easier to keep it hovering.
It is. I'm really feeling, I'm feeling rough about my true inbox.
I'm looking at like five or six persistent emails.
I really got to get back to you, but it's a whole different deal than if it's 10,000.
Did you declare any sort of bankruptcy equivalent of like inbox bank or you just go like archive
a good, like if it's two years or older, I'm just going to archive it and it'll come back
if it matters.
Or did you literally go through everyone and deal with it?
I did go through everyone individually.
I didn't just blanket say everything other than two years is closed.
Yeah.
But I did kind of treat things as like, I don't like stale bots.
So we don't run a stale bot.
Yeah, I don't like those either.
Yeah.
Like I don't object to things being closed like as the resolution versus fixed.
But I want like somebody to be making that decision.
Right.
You know, and put a reason behind it.
So yeah, I tried like going through every single issue.
Basically, my workflow is just every single day, pick an issue, work on it.
Pick another one, okay, spend a couple hours, wait until the next day.
And yeah, just like had to keep making calls on them.
Yeah, you're like, all right, two come in a day.
I'm going to do 20 a day until I catch up or something like that, right?
There was a lot of stuff also where it was, it had just been sitting open for years.
you know and nobody had really commented on it besides like or maybe they had the most people
had commented on was saying like me too but they hadn't actually like moved the discussion forward
and yeah i you know it would be nice if open source if like more people like contribute i don't blame
anybody for not like contributing you know or being a contributor but i would love to like attract
more you know long-term contributors and stuff but that's like kind of the way it starts is you need
to like help people like make calls and stuff evaluate things right uh you know instead of saying
me too start looking into it and saying like okay me too and okay here's all the like issues that
might come up when we do this or i looked at the code base and we could do it this way you know
right exactly i also want it but i want it and i think here's a path forward or here's a prototype
You know, like, they have to advance the conversation.
And that wasn't, like, happening in a lot of the old issues.
So I did kind of, like, I didn't outright just close old issues,
but, like, I did say, like, okay, this thing is old,
and it hasn't seen any movement.
There's a lot of things also where it's, like, yeah,
it's a reasonable request, but is it necessary for Flask?
Does it belong in Flask or in extension, right?
Like, this is something I'm trying to figure out,
Like, I want to be writing, like, documentation for other maintainers on the team, you know, so they understand, like, how I did this sort of stuff.
And it's really, this is, like, the trickiest problem.
I don't know how I'm going to document yet, but, like, I got a sense over time of just, like, being able to really quickly make a call of, like, yes or no on things.
Right.
Good fit, bad fit.
Let's go.
I can look at an issue and say, like, okay, no, this doesn't belong in for XYZ or something.
because like flask has like all the libraries in palettes have like very focused core like goal
of them and they try to be extensible to some degree so a lot of the things you can do
by making extension so really what i try to look for is like i need this thing in flask because it
is literally not possible to write an extension to do this without being able to like hook into it
this way or something like that.
No, that makes sense.
Sure.
Part of the Zen of Flask is that it's minimal.
And then you build around it.
You pick your database.
You pick your whatever and then go from there.
Yeah.
Cool.
All right.
Well, three open issues and incredible.
As in 67,000 stars, that's also pretty incredible.
Let's see.
So you join each one of these different ones.
You kind of gave a sense of like how many downloads.
So for Flask, maybe these numbers changed, but I think it hasn't been about a couple months.
It's around 75 million downloads a month.
That's a hefty chunk of user base there.
Yeah.
I occasionally look at pipistats.org or pepi.tech are the two websites that track these numbers.
So I can look at the current one.
Flask is loads.
downloads in the last day 3.15 million downloads in the last month 66 million um okay it's summertime
people are chilling yeah look at that look at that yeah yeah and there's like sometimes there's like
random you can see in this graph here like there's just random times where it just suddenly drops by
like a couple hundred thousand or right or rises yeah yeah like if you look at the left half of
this graph it's higher but like i think that's just because like big services like come in and
out of existence or like do an upgrade or whatever um so there are some very big systems out there
that are just downloading doing a ton of downloads yeah it's pretty wild it's so wild you'll probably
also spot some pipe outages well i imagine in that graph which has got nothing to do and like
They also change the way they report over time.
Like pip and stuff change how they report statistics.
So I usually just look at like the overall numbers,
which made me pretty consistent.
Yeah.
Try not to look at it too often.
Like I said at the beginning,
like it's a big number to know that like this many people
are about to download any change you make.
Yeah.
And when I think about these kinds of numbers,
it's not just if you make a change to Flask,
then it affects this many people.
But these are themselves applications using this,
each of which has many, many, many users potentially.
So there's a multiplier on top of this, right?
Yeah.
And yeah, that's been difficult.
That's one of the other state of Flask.
That's the other half of the state of Flask
is like we've been making a lot of progress,
but like this amount of responsibility
uh rests uh pretty heavily on me it's like it can be pretty stressful and you did mention a baby and
being potentially tired in the future and stuff like that as well right so
um but like combined you know these numbers combined with the thought that anything i do could
break a bunch of people and get them to complain at me or people will complain at me even if i don't
break a ton of people and uh just kind of like the ever-present notion of we are not at inbox zero on
some of the projects and stuff so there is still a lot of open stuff it's um sure yeah it's a lot
of stress for me and it's been uh i've like suffered burnout a few times from uh per year
for the last four years or so oh man that's rough are you getting some support from the other people
at the Oregon potentially from outside?
Yeah, I, I, there is, there are other people on the team.
So it's not like we're a bus factor of one in the sense of like, if I was not here for
some reason, other people would have access to these things and could keep them going.
But the reality is, not to downplay all the work that they do in the community and,
uh, when they, when they are working on code, but like I do probably 90%.
of the code and like the decision making and all that sort of stuff.
Right.
So it would definitely be a very different project if I wasn't around.
It would at minimum be a scramble, right?
Like when Guido stepped down, like, wait a minute, who's doing what now?
Yeah.
So like, I, so this is what I've been like trying to work on for a long time because
I've kind of always recognized that I've been kind of the, not limiting factor,
but like i'm like the point of failure in this thing um and so i've been trying to grow the team
and uh trying to make our processes more automated you know try and then um now what i'm trying to do
is uh because i know i have this hard deadline in january when i'm going to have less time
uh is i'm trying to document how to do what i've learned to do like how to be a maintainer because
Because something we don't really have a lot of, it feels like, is we have a contributing guide, right?
Or we have user documentation or developer guide, like how to use Flask.
But we don't have a how to maintain Flask documentation.
Yeah.
Seems to be kind of missing from the community in general.
I presume that'd be out in public.
People interested.
You can check it out whenever that gets written down.
Yeah.
It's not going to be a private thing.
Yeah, of course.
It's not ready yet, but it's something I'm actively working on.
It's like identifying like all the stuff I've accumulated in my head and what I've learned how to do or decisions I've made or like services we use.
Like just the fact that, oh, you know, we're part of the PSF.
This is how you contact the PSF.
Yeah.
What does that mean?
Who do I call?
Yeah, exactly.
Or like that we're part of Tidelift.
And, you know, these other donation sources.
Yeah.
Also, like, how do I make a decision on whether to keep something closed or opened?
Or when is it time to make a new release?
Or what is our version policy or our support policy or our security policy?
Like, a lot of these things are under documented right now if they're documented at all.
And so that's kind of my goal for the rest of this year
is to make palettes more sustainable
regardless of how much availability I have.
Make it a little more systematized, maybe a little bit.
Yeah.
So before we move off of PyPI stats,
Goose has an interesting meta question.
Is PyPI stats built on Flask itself?
Do you have any idea?
I have no idea.
I know they're open source.
Oh, yeah.
Okay, so maybe you could tell that way.
I was going to say there's not like a header or something that Flask sends.
So, yeah.
Yeah.
I can't find it.
We don't know.
It is open source.
Oh, here we go.
Here we go.
Have we got a requirement?
We've got a PyProject.tomo?
Yeah, it's Flask.
There you have it.
How about that?
There we go.
Beautiful.
It's very rewarding every time I find out a new place that just decided to use.
Flask and has been using it and it's just completely behind the scenes and you can't tell, like nothing's,
like it's all just working. Yeah. But I love going to like conferences for that reason too,
because so many people come up to me and like say like, oh yeah, we use Flask to like run the Mars
Rover or somebody, one of the people giving a talk at FlaskCon was like, my company writes the like
energy management software for this conference center and it's in flask
it's very fun to learn all those new have you ever gotten out to the jpl i know it's like
a couple hours drive that'd be fun right to go out there and actually see the flask code see it
this is what runs in the rover in the helicopter awesome all right so that's flask uh what one do
want so maybe that a good foundation yeah we did uh like flask and verixwag are pretty tied uh
because most of the stuff that people report to flask is actually an issue with one of the other
libraries that flask is using and most often that's with verixwag so you can see we're not
in box zero we're at inbox nine right now that's still that's incredible you know maybe like i asked
you to explain palettes like wekzoig you know that's probably not how english speaking folks
would say that workzoiger work zoog or something right but armin the creator of this is german or
austrian but speaks german and so that's the german pronunciation and hence that's why we're
saying it that way right that's my best approximation of the i'm sure i'm doing it wrong also but um
pretty close yeah it literally is like uh like it means like work thing which is like yeah yeah
Yeah, basically tool.
Yeah, it's like tools, like your carpentry tools
or handyman tools type thing, yeah.
Yeah, but this was written before Flask existed,
and I think it was written more when WSGI was becoming a spec
or had just become a spec because it is just a bunch of utilities
for doing HTTP header parsing,
doing all the low-level WSGI environment management,
uh wrapping that information in request and response objects so you can kind of work with
them a little easier so it's all like the underlying tools that you need uh to build flask
um there's also like the whole routing system you know so you can in flask you just do at app.route
but behind the scenes what that's doing is it's adding it to a uh route map that very soik defines
and that defines like here's how we actually like collect that and like turn it into a bunch of rules
that we can match urls against and then there's other things in there as well the reloader the
debugger the dev server so one of the updates you gave on Werkzeug is a performance improvement
by way of getting rid of the stir bites duopoly.
Yeah, I've been doing a lot in Vrxwag. So that that one and the
URL of one that we'll talk about were two big things. But basically, like this library,
like I just described it, it's like just a huge collection of tools and little utility functions.
And there was a history there, because when this when all these libraries first started,
Python 3 didn't exist or barely existed.
And so everything was written originally for Python 2,
where strings and bytes worked a lot different.
Yeah, that was one of the primary breaking changes.
There were other changes, but that was the one
that people really had a long-lived bug tracking.
If it's different syntax, you just change the syntax.
But if it's subtle behavior changes, then trouble looms.
yeah um and so uh yeah in python too it was much easier to like well not yeah it was easier to
treat like incoming data as bytes but like treat it as a string there wasn't like as big a distinction
between strings and bytes uh which was convenient in some ways especially for like low-level tools
like http where you just work in ascii bytes say if you like ascii it's probably fine if you don't
like ASCII, you might not like it so much.
Yeah, but it also caused...
I first learned Python 3,
so I have a kind of difference on this,
but I like Python 3's distinction.
I think it's much better to have that distinction.
Yeah, you and me both.
But at the time, when it was first happening,
it wasn't as clear-cut, like, oh, yeah, this is better
or this is easier because you had to support both.
And so when Python 3 came out and started getting more momentum,
all these libraries tacked on support for both Python 2 and Python 3,
which, among other things, meant that you had to now check for
whether you were getting strings or bytes everywhere.
Because you might be in Python 2 land where you're getting bytes,
or you might be in Python 3 land where you're getting strings
and need to do other conversions.
Veriksoig was especially bad
because it's a collection
of independent utility functions.
Some functions build on each other,
but every function could potentially be imported
and used for its own little piece of functionality.
And so every single function
needed to check all its arguments
for like my stringer bytes.
Even if most of the time,
especially nowadays,
people aren't using Veriksoig directly
and all these tools.
They're using Flask, which just does the right thing from the get-go, which means all those
intermediate checks on the way were totally unnecessary, you know, because you already
knew from like the first function.
Right.
You're testing 10 times for the same thing down the call set.
And this was just pervasive throughout.
VarickSite was just everywhere with all these unnecessary checks.
And it made the code more complex to maintain, reason about, made the like execution slower.
there's kind of a another thing going on at the same time which is like we had because we could
support like because we were working with bytes in a lot of places there was also like a lot more
support for well maybe the data is encoded in this encoding or this one but nowadays everybody
like I looked at before I made this decision I looked at stats everybody 99.5 percent of people
web applications on the web right now are using UTF-8 so they're never dealing with their encodings
and UTF-8 can encode everything yeah and so like Fairxweg was doing all these things about letting
you pass encodings all over the place and switch between things and that was also complexity
so i finally decided okay i had heard some anecdotes as well from people who had switched from
using python 2 to python 3 or had stuck with python 2 and old versions of verxwag because
they had noticed a significant performance difference in the first versions of verxwag
that added that two and three compatibility um and so i figured okay i'm going to get a similar
speed up if I remove that now, now that we don't support Python 2 at all.
That was very, very complicated.
I basically just had to go through every single function and start removing it,
run all the tests, see what failed, pick another function to keep working on,
and just slowly, slowly pull it all apart.
But I did end up with...
So now, Variksvig just supports strings everywhere,
except in the very few places where it works directly with the request and response data.
Like multi-part form file.
Yeah, when you first get the request in and it's just the raw body that you might turn into JSON or form data, etc.
Or when you're finally producing the response and taking either file data, which is binary,
or string data and turning it into the bytes.
That's the only place now where it deals with bytes.
Everywhere else is strings.
And the boundary there is always UTF-8.
And if UTF-8 isn't your thing, we're not preventing you from using other things.
It just means that when you're at those boundaries, you can take the bytes directly and work with
them.
Cool.
Surprisingly, I have gotten -- like, this was a huge, massive change.
And I have not gotten any bug reports about it.
Which I'm just, I was like,
I was stressing so much about like, okay, this is huge.
I mean, we tested it first and like made beta releases and everything.
But those go to all of no attention.
All right. I can't leave the house for the next week. Publish.
Yeah. No, like you joke, but like seriously,
when I hit the publish button or when I used to hit the publish button,
I would be like, I want to go for a walk now because I just did a ton of work and
I just want to clear my head.
oh god then an hour from now when i get back what is my inbox going to look like yeah yeah yeah
that's great and you know you talk another part of your presentation at flaskon
was about project level stuff and you also talked about the systemization
type of thing you're looking for so one of the things you switched to is the trusted publishers
that's kind of cool right yeah so uh i mentioned a little bit about like when we were talking about
um uh sorry okay uh when we were talking about uh pinning requirements i was saying oh you know it
makes it a lot easier for every contributor to work on things at sprints if every single environment
is the same. And so kind of on a meta level, there's a lot of different tools and configurations
and workflows we use across projects, but they've kind of been developed over time as I've learned
them. And so I've been doing work on a meta level. So every project now, if you go look at Flask
in Verksoig and Jinja and you clone all the repos,
all the repos look exactly the same.
They all have the same files, the same directory layout,
same tool configurations, et cetera.
Because just like it should be easy for every contributor
to get the same environment, it should be easy for anybody
who's used to contributing to Flask to go over to Verksoig
and be just as comfortable in that project.
It's the Flask way and it all goes the same, right?
So yeah, like trusted publishing, that was another big part of this was like making workflows.
So we have a workflow for running tests, for example.
But publishing used to be a very manual process.
And it's evolved over the years too, because we were on Travis before, and then we needed to make like Windows builds for Markup Safe, which has wheels.
so we were on AppVayor also.
Then Travis went away and stuff,
and GitHub Actions became more.
But that was all for tests.
For building, we basically,
when we wanted to make a new release,
it was way harder in the past,
which is why releases happened less often,
because I would have to say,
okay, I'm ready.
Do all the little bookkeeping stuff
to set the release version,
and the release date and everything.
Now I have to go get my Mac, get my Windows machine,
get my Linux machine, make the builds on all of them,
then manually consolidate them,
upload them manually to PyPI, et cetera,
and make sure that all worked.
So what I have now is they have a standard publish workflow
on every single project.
It works exactly the same way.
And you make a PR so that you can see all the tests run.
You make a PR that just does that version bump
and the date says the release date.
You watch all the tests pass, and then you push a tag
before you merge.
You push the release tag.
And that kicks off the build workflow.
So we run our build.
We do SLSA or SALSA attestation to say,
like, these builds are associated with these commits
and were built by these workers.
It's kind of like a supply chain level thing.
And then we automatically,
like it will collect all that stuff,
show you here is the release,
like here's a draft release for this.
Here are all the,
like you have one more opportunity
to look at the files
and then a maintainer can go in
and click publish in GitHub's UI.
And that will kick off like,
okay, maintainer said everything's good.
We're just going to upload it now.
And that's all automated.
We're using the trusted publishing workflow between PyPI and GitHub.
So I no longer have to have my password stored locally for PyPI
or have tokens made for each project.
All the authentication happens between GitHub and PyPI automatically and securely.
It's pretty cool.
If you go look up trusted publishing, PyPI has a blog or documentation that explains it.
but it is really, really convenient.
And it makes, like this whole workflow
means that whenever I want to make a new release,
I just make a regular PR, push a tag,
and then see everything pass and say, yes, we're good.
So I just basically have to push three buttons now.
Yeah, that's fantastic.
Which makes it a lot easier to just make more regular releases.
Like even bug fix releases, I was always unwilling to make them fast
because it was so much fun.
Yeah, well, if it's a matter of just pushing a commit
and then saying, okay, you're way more likely to quickly ship fixes
and ship smaller releases and all sorts of stuff.
It's really good.
And you don't have the whole supply chain problem of your machine somehow got hacked,
but then now when you do your build,
somebody's injected something gnarly into the wheel, right?
Because it never goes through you.
It just goes from GitHub directly to PyPI through GitHub Actions, right?
Yeah.
And GitHub added their own.
So the SLSA attestation that I was talking about,
if you scroll down on this screen,
you can see that multiple.intoto.jsonl.
If you click on it, it's just a big blob of text.
But that's basically describing,
here are these wheel files,
like those wheel files and sdist files.
And here's like signatures
and about the GitHub environment
that built this and everything.
GitHub itself is adding that similar sort of attestation.
And then PyPI is also adding more attestations.
It's not out yet, though.
But I'm sure I will be testing it once they're starting it
and once they release it in beta.
So being able to attest that our build environment
was consistent with what you're the artifacts you're seeing and like the upload along the way
was secured and like um it is gaining more like that's more gaining more attention nowadays
importance yeah that's really trying to keep at all it's excellent it also makes it easier to
hand it over to someone else and trust that they're doing it right not like yeah something
now they only like windows seven so you got a weird wheel or something now yeah i mean this yeah
this one it's on is like was such an impediment to finding other maintainers because you had to
teach like I think I probably had some document that explained how to do this build before
like all the steps I went through but it was like it was so complicated and like yeah if somebody
else wanted to make a release I would have to make sure they did everything correctly um I had just
gotten used to it it was like rote for me but it was a lot of steps yeah now just anybody does the
same, you know, make a PR, push a button. Everything else is done for them. Yeah. Yeah, that's awesome.
All right. So the two takeaways that I got from Virksog's update was this dropping of the two to
three juggling made it 50% faster for request response. And URL lib is no longer URL lib-ish.
Yeah, so that was the other part, going back to Virxwig.
So we removed the string bytes testing all over the place.
And Virxwig, this was, again, historically because of, like, Python 2 versus Python 3 differences and then compatibility and stuff.
But another of the changes in Python 3 was URL lib.
In Python 2, there was, like, URL lib and URL lib 2.
And that's why there's also the project URL of three now.
Yeah.
But Python 3 kind of consolidated that back into URL lib with sub packages instead.
So it kind of changed the interfaces and where everything was.
So at the time, it made sense for VerixFug to just copy that code into our own code base
and then make our own tweaks to it to be compatible with everything.
But what that ended up meaning was we had an entire copy of URLib with our own tweaks in our code base.
And then we weren't keeping up with changes.
So like CPython has like 100 different core devs on it.
I mean, they're not all paying attention to URLib, but they're making regular security updates or just performance improvements and that sort of stuff.
And we're not getting any of those benefits because we now have like this
vendor copy that we've changed ourselves.
We couldn't even bring in the changes.
And just like the string bytes everywhere,
having that our own copy of that really complex low level code made it harder
to reason about the code and be like maintain it.
And all this stuff is kind of like,
it's not the essential parts of Werkzeug.
Werkzeug is like trying to be the WSGI utilities and stuff.
It's not trying to be like every single possible.
Like it's not trying to,
we don't need to make our own URL of utility and everything
to be virtually.
Yeah.
So that was another big one where I identified like,
okay, this is just a lot of complexity.
I didn't actually expect this to be a performance improvement,
but when I actually went through and removed URL lib
and our own copy and replaced it with Python's version,
we got like a 30% speed up just on our own.
So the combined of those two big changes was like about a 50% speed up in our request response.
Yeah, that's awesome.
It turns out that Python's implementation of all this was just faster than ours.
And it still does all the same things.
Yeah, and now you don't have to mess with it.
You get it for free.
Yeah, exactly.
Like everyone else.
A lot of the changes in all the libraries are stuff where I've been, like I said, I wasn't the original author of this stuff.
So I've had to learn the code bases.
I've had to dig into them and say, what is written here?
Why is it written this way?
How is it all related?
And along the way, I just keep identifying, okay, this is the actual purpose of this library.
does this fit into that purpose or can we be doing something different?
And so kind of trying to like slim down the libraries and like focus,
tighten up the focus on their like purposes more.
Right. If there's parts that are, it needs to work,
but it's not its purpose. Maybe that can come from somewhere else. Yeah.
Yeah. All right. We got about 10. Yeah, absolutely.
We've got about 10 more minutes tops probably.
So what else do you want to cover to give us the state?
I'll mention Jinja and Click really briefly
because these two libraries are also huge.
They're used everywhere, downloaded a ton.
Jinja is a templating library.
You write template files,
and then you can render them with variables
to produce output HTML,
but also text files or all sorts of stuff.
Yeah, I think people pigeonhole Jinja.
Yeah, I think people pigeonhole Jinja2 much.
They think, okay, well, I'm generating dynamic HTML
from a server request.
You can use Jinja to generate all sorts of files.
I use it on stuff basically on Talk Python,
generate emails.
Somebody wants to reset their password, right?
I'll generate an email body from it, for example, right?
That kind of stuff.
Yeah, and then click is a...
The, just like Flask is a framework for web applications,
Click is a framework for command line applications.
And both of these libraries have gotten a lot of attention from me,
but they are not inbox zero, unlike the other libraries.
I have not managed to get them down there
because I was working on all the other libraries.
And so these are where I'm going to need to focus.
Like I said, my current focus for the rest of this year
is writing maintainer documentation.
So I'm trying to do less code.
And all of these libraries are stable.
Everybody downloads them.
Like a ton of people download them.
They all work.
You know, we can make them better and everything.
But they're not in like, it's not like they're
in immediate danger or need of anything.
But I do want to like clear out the backlogs of those as well.
And, you know, looking for more contributors for that.
To help with that.
Yeah, you said you're looking for contributors.
who are really psyched about typing and also first project.
- Oh God, if anybody is an expert in typing
and type annotations and static type tools,
all the libraries do pass mypy strict tests and export.
Like we do do some testing against Pyright to some degree,
But I'm just typing just it's very hard for me to understand.
Like it's a very complicated subject on its own versus all the other stuff I have to be doing.
So I really would like somebody who's like, I am an expert at typing.
I'm going to like start fixing up what you're because I like had to learn typing as I was
like adding it to these libraries.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a big thing that we can improve.
OK.
And yeah, you know, there's like we've gotten a lot of attention, a lot of the stuff in
Click and Jinja also.
We have PRs for a lot of stuff.
It's just a matter of me having the time to go through and review all of them to cut down
that backlog.
But we're getting there.
I'll get there eventually.
Yeah, beautiful.
And then the last.
So the last thing I want to mention, or we ran out of time completely, is besides palettes,
the core projects itself.
I've kind of mentioned this theme of trying
to make the projects more maintainable
and grow the community and the team.
And part of that that I've started identifying
is the greater ecosystem around these projects.
So Flask is great to use on its own,
but it's made even better by all the extensions out there
that people have written for doing email,
doing database stuff, authentication, all sorts of things.
And just like Flask itself and all those libraries,
there was a long period where they weren't getting as maintained
as much attention and stuff.
And then I started stepping in.
A lot of those extensions were written quite a long time ago now.
And the maintainers of those have kind of moved on to different things.
And so there's a lot of stuff in the ecosystem that isn't getting as much attention as it needs.
And a lot of the times, the maintainers are aware of this, and they're willing to take help, to get help with those things.
And so I was really inspired by a project for Django extensions called Jazz Band.
Oh, yeah.
where basically they're an organization that says,
are you a popular Django extension or pip-tools?
For some reason, they also control pip-tools.
But do you not have time to be the maintainer of it anymore?
Come over to Jazz Band.
You can still be involved in the project,
but we'll also help you find more people from the community.
we will open up the maintaining process to your interested users in the community.
And so I'm doing a similar thing with pallets called pallets eco for ecosystem.
Okay.
So if you go to github.com/pallets-eco, yeah.
With an S?
Yeah, pallets-eco, GitHub.
what we've started to do is reach out to um maintainers of like uh flask sql alchemy flask
admin flask security flask mail um blinker caching debug toolbar like all these huge extensions so
many of them uh have these huge backlogs just like flask and all the other projects did when i got
started with them you know and uh their their maintainers are overwhelmed and so i reach out
to them, I've been reaching out to them and kind of explaining, hey, we're starting this thing up.
Do you want to add your project? So we've had some success already. We've had people at Sprint
contribute to them. And like I was talking about, I've kind of standardized how Flask and the other
projects look, like all the tools they're using, the layouts they're using, the workflows they're
using. I'm taking that same approach and trying to standardize all the extensions we get too.
So the idea is that anybody who's used to contributing
to one of these extensions, it should be just as familiar
to them to jump into another extension
and contribute there as well, right?
Yeah, that's a great idea, yeah.
And so with Pallets Eco, we can help find maintainers
from the community, add them.
But the core team for Pallets themselves
still has access as well.
So, you know, if we make some change to Flask,
it finally removes something that some,
like some internal thing that somebody was relying on.
And like suddenly this popular live extension no longer works.
We at least have access.
Like we're not,
we're probably not going to take on the responsibility of being the like
core maintainers of all these things,
but we can step in and make an emergency release that just,
oh, you just needed to change this line here.
Make a bug fix release really quick.
So we can at least keep the ecosystem going.
And now we like work on finding longer term sustainability with more maintainers.
I love that idea.
Cause a lot of times it is a really small change, but it, if it doesn't work, it doesn't work.
Right.
Exactly.
Like a lot of the times it's been like, I like we have made like little deprecations and then
renewals and stuff, which have just, that was the one thing that some random extension was relying
on that every, like half the ecosystem ended up relying on.
and we just had like, you know, change a line or change an import per, add an argument.
Yeah.
So yeah, that's my big focus now.
If people are interested in contributing to palettes,
they're welcome to contribute to Jinja and Click
or any of the projects as well.
If there's open issues, they can work on them.
But a huge new source of involvement for people
can be, what are the extensions you're using?
Let's get you involved in those as well.
Yeah, it makes a lot of sense.
Because to make a change to Flask,
it's a highly polished piece of software.
but the extensions potentially are more open to just jumping in and getting into it.
Yeah. It's really, it's really hard for people. It's hard to tell people this, but like, you know,
people come in excited, like, Oh, I want to contribute to Flask. And then they look at it
and they're like, Oh, three open issues. What do I do? Or like, and these three issues are like
really low level stuff or like they've already been handled or something. Sure. And so we like,
Yeah, like what we're telling people now is like, okay, well, Flask, not only is it made up of these five other libraries, but there's also this whole extension ecosystem out there for you to contribute to.
Everybody's heard of Flask, so we can point them at the right place.
They come to us and then we point them to the community.
Yeah, excellent.
Well, I'll be sure to link to that in the show notes as well.
Yeah.
And with that, I think we're out of time.
Thank you for being here.
Just final call to action.
You know, people either want to contribute or just want to use Flask.
What do you tell them?
Yeah, yeah. So like I said, we're developing Pallets Eco. I'm currently writing maintainer
documentation, so it'll make it easier for people to get involved in that way, writing a new website
with a lot of our policies and everything. But the main point of contact for all of this and the way
we coordinate with our community is on our Discord server. So if you go to discord.gg slash Pallets,
that will let you join the pallet server.
It's open to everybody.
We need help not only contributing to libraries,
but answering questions in our questions channel
or triaging issues and all sorts of things.
There's lots of different ways to be involved in the projects
without writing code, and it all starts on that Discord server.
Awesome.
Well, thanks again for being here, and catch you next time.
Yeah, thank you.
bye